[Music]
Bloomberg Audio Studios, podcasts,
radio, news.
>> Joe, I have an embarrassing confession.
>> Go on.
>> You know the birth death adjustment?
>> I have the same confession.
>> I used to think it was something about
like the population of people and the
labor supply, but it's not. It's about
business formation.
>> Yes, that's right. Oh, my my confession
is even more embarrassing, which is that
I literally always forget what it is.
I did a deadlift.
>> I am both the most popular trader and
most successful trader at Citadel.
>> Feta's going viral.
>> Uh, barges.
>> This is an after school special. Except
>> I've decided I'm going to base my entire
personality going forward on campaigning
for a strategic pork reserve in the US.
>> Black gold.
>> These are the the important questions.
Is it robots taking over the world?
>> No, I think that like in a couple years
the AI will do a really good job of
making the Outlaws podcast. One day that
person will have the mandate of heaven.
>> How do I get more popular and
successful?
>> We do have
>> the perfect guest.
>> You're listening to lots more where we
catch up with friends about what's going
on right now.
>> Because even when Odd Lots is over,
there's always lots more.
>> And we really do have the perfect guest.
>> When people are listening to this, it is
jobs day. We're recording this September
4th. Jobs day. September 5th. The
important thing to know right now is
that to some extent that monthly
non-farm payrolls report that everyone
depends on and relies on has never felt
to me like more of a moving target in
terms of what I'm supposed to be looking
at. For many years it's like okay how
many jobs were created this month? Yeah,
it's going to get revised a little bit
but that tells you something. Now
between seasonality
postcoavid sort of normalization that's
still processing and then of course the
sort of changes in immigration policy
which have swung dramatically in a year.
These numbers it's not clear that you
actually have to put in some work to
understand these numbers.
>> No, totally. And also I mean the the BLS
itself seems to have some difficulty uh
with the numbers because the trend that
we've seen is they put out a non-farm
payroll like an initial estimate on a
Friday and then a few weeks later you
get the revisions and the revisions
always seem to be downwards lately.
>> Lately they've been mostly downwards and
then there's annual revisions and those
are coming up I believe next week. And
you know, we are at a time when setting
aside the collection and of course
setting aside the fact that the BLS
chief has been uh fired and there's
going to be a new one at some point.
Setting aside all of these things, we're
also at a time when there are
significant questions about just the
macro state of the economy and whether
the sort of low hiring, low firing mode
which is characterized for a while now
is at risk of deteriorating further. I
don't know. It's a tough it's a tough
read.
>> You know who we should ask? Steve
Englander. Okay, but let me start with
with a broader question issue maybe.
>> Excellent. And the thing is that the
question has changed like in in the past
we we used to say okay last month or you
know last 12 months NFP growth was
200,000 looks like 100,000 now things
have slowed down that's all we had to
know this time around because supply is
so important everyone is making an
estimate and kind of saying well
nativeorn workers you know maybe 70,000
if you're pessimistic if you think we
have net immigration from foreignb born
workers you have a view of 50 and if you
think that there's still some legal
immigration coming in, maybe you're at
100. And that means that getting the
level right is really important. And the
problem with the NFP number is that it
actually has two components. One of
which is the one that we all think
about. They survey about 160,000
businesses, maybe 600,000
establishments, and basically say,
"Okay, how many workers did you have
last month? How many did you have this
month?" and through their statistical
analysis they say okay this is a change.
So that's for firms that are in
continual operation that gives them that
number. The problem is that they have no
handle on firms that have just opened
and very little handle on firms that
have just closed. So they use something
called the burst death adjustment to
adjust for employment by those latter
two categories of firms. you know, net
job creation from new firms minus
closing firms. And the problem is that
they have a very simple model and it is
it was fine in the past when all you
cared about was the direction, but now
when you're saying it really matters
>> if NFP growth is 50, having a bias in
that number really affects things. And
what you see is that that number has
through thick and thin has stayed about
a 100,000 jobs. You know, when you
seasonally adjust it because they
publish a not seasonal adjustment, but
you can do a rough and ready seasonal
adjustment. It's very stable at about
every month 100,000 jobs or almost
100,000 jobs are coming from that birth
death adjustment in terms of what we see
on Bloomberg page Friday morning at
8:30. We have another source of
information on that which lags but which
is far more accurate. This is something
called the business employment dynamics.
It lags by about 8 months but it's based
on the quarterly census of employment
and wages. And what that shows is that
in 2024 like Q4 2024 say the four
quarters both the employment growth
coming from continuing firms and
continuing operation and the employment
growth from newly open firms let's just
closed firms they've tanked.
>> So you're sort of looking at a reliable
source because it's it's not even a
sample. This is the entire population.
They know what open and what's closed,
saying, "Hey, there just isn't any
significant jobs creation from newly
formed firms." And the NFP number keeps
telling you that there's 100,000 jobs
coming from that.
>> This is already excellent. Next week, we
are getting yet another one of these QC
quarterly
>> Q. What do you call it?
>> I call it QC. What's the right one? How
what do we call it?
>> I call it QC.
>> Okay. We get a new QCEW.
That's the 9th. September 9th, we get
that. All right. Tell us what this is.
Let's walk through this part again in
terms of what is it that's high quality
about this data? Why we expect it to
show further downward revisions and why
there continues to be the sort of
downward bias in this initial snapshot
versus ladder better insight?
>> Oh, okay. First, NFP has a big sample,
but it's a sample. their sampling errors
and people who don't report and we don't
know if there's a bias and who's
reporting who's not reporting. So
there's always some inherent error
there.
>> QCW is basically the universe. It's not
a sample.
>> They get administrative data from the
labor department saying how many people
paid into unemployment insurance and
that's basically everybody because
everybody does. Everybody who's working
does pay into unemployment insurance.
And so when they come up with a number,
there's a bit of revision because
there's sometimes some firms don't
report in time, but there's not much.
And that it's very authoritative.
And so if you sort of say, oh, QCW and
and the business employment dynamics
tell us that in 2024 there was almost no
job creation from newly opened, let's
just close firms. You believe it?
Because there's you're not going to get
a better source. There's no other source
to that. And so that's why it's used for
the benchmark. probably should be used
to rebenchmark employment more
frequently in the year because they do
publish it quarterly. But, you know,
when it comes out, it's a big deal. And
we think it's likely to tell us that
somewhere between 750 and maybe 1.1
million jobs. That's the overstatement
between Q1 2024 and Q1 2025.
>> Wow.
>> And that would knock off a lot in in in
terms of headline employment growth. The
key point is that there's no reason to
believe that the bias has really
shifted.
>> One of the other unusual things that's
going on at the moment is we have this
new head of the BLS installed by the
Trump administration. And that new head
suggested initially that the BLS could
just stop publishing jobs numbers
altogether or maybe they could publish
them less frequently like on a quarterly
basis or something. is the quarterly
idea maybe that's reasonable given the
lag with the QCW
data.
>> I think that they can do things that are
far less dramatic to improve the quality
of the monthly numbers because we do
have some information that's relevant
for jobs creation by newly opened firms.
Going back to business employment
dynamics, if you look at how job
creation from existing firms, continuing
firms and job creation from new firms
move, they tend to move together. the
amplitude is different but the direction
is very much the same. They can use the
sample data that they get from the
160,000
firms 600,000 plus establishments that
they sample and say look if continuing
firms are telling us that job creation
is 20,000 a month. It's very unlikely
that job creation from new firms is
going to be 100. We can use a variety of
statistical methods to sort of make a
guesstimate. It won't be perfect, but
it'll be a lot better.
[Music]
>> Speaking of the new BLS person, Joe, um
I saw the most worrying sentence in an
analyst note this week. So, the sentence
was I have it on my screen. The sentence
is because Trump has his own BLS person
now. I don't necessarily see a bad
number on Friday.
>> I'm not I'm not that pessimistic. I
think um
>> I don't know, but I don't know. I don't
have a view on I don't have a view on
this. It's But wait, where was who said
this?
>> I don't want to say because I'm not sure
it's public or not, but
>> but this is a notable person.
>> Yes, it's someone you know actually.
>> Okay, fine.
>> And not me.
>> And not Steve.
>> Not Stephen. Let's talk about the
conversation has focused on these levels
and pace of job creation and so forth.
We recently did an episode with Austin
Goulsby, the Chicago Fed president, and
he was like, "So much is in flux. I'm
not really looking at levels." And he
called what he's like, he used this term
very dramatic, the four horsemen of
truth. He's interested in rates. He's
interested in the unemployment rate,
which is still at 4.2%. He's interested
at the hiring rate, which we had the
Jolts report come out this week. It's at
3.3%. He's interested in the firing
rate, which I think has still been
fairly low. Maybe he's looking at like
the rate of wage growth. I don't
remember what the fourth horsemen was.
In a time of volatility, what do you
think about this idea? Like, let's just
forget about levels and just focus on
rates because they don't get revised as
much. You go out and you ask thousands
of people, are you employed or
unemployed right now? And if 4.2% say
they're unemployed, that is probably a
reasonable proxy for whether people are
employed or not.
>> Right. But Joe, if you turned out to be
the next person named to the FOMC to the
board
>> and you see a payroll number and it
comes out at 75,000 like tomorrow's
consensus, is that a strong number or a
weak number?
>> Well, that's what I'm saying. I just
look at the uh I don't know. I mean, I
don't know. Let's say so right now just
for what it's worth, the unemployment
rate is at 4.2%. Economists expect it to
tick up to 4.3%.
Let's say it comes at 4.2%. Let's say we
have a weak NFP number, but the
unemployment rate stays at 4.2%.
Why don't I say, okay, things are still
more or less fine.
>> Well, let me say this. I I like rates,
but I like the employment to population
ratio, okay?
>> Because we know that participation rate
is cyclical.
>> And if you look to the employment to
population ratio, all these comments
that unemployment rate is stable, it
looks in balance, nothing's changed,
they don't hold up very well. We've had
pretty consistent drop. Not a 2008 type
of drop, but you know, was like over 60
a year ago. Now it's 59.6.
>> Okay.
>> It's telling us that there's kind of
increased softening. I think you can't
be choosy about which rates you you look
at, but I think in cyclical periods
probably employment to population is
telling you more. And this time it is
more on Waller's side than it is on
Powell's side. I know we've been talking
about weaknesses in the NFP estimates,
but what's your expectation for um the
official number?
>> Well, I wrote we're a little bit
splitrained on this leftrain, right
brain, because we live in a world where
we have to get the market reaction
right. Right.
>> So, our forecast is 75,000. It's it's
very close to consensus. You know,
>> nothing dramatic.
>> I just say this that you got to realize
there's so much randomness in the
number. It could be 125,000 and not be
meaningful, but it's just the way it
goes. You know what we've argued if you
look at the range of forecasts almost
everybody is between like 40,000 and
100,000 105,000. So you get a number
like 30. I think that will be a very
dramatic number in terms of
>> outside the range of expectations.
>> Yeah. I mean, because this range is
really tight in in terms of market
expectation, and I think it would put 50
on the table for the Fed because I I
think the argument would be
>> that if you get a number that's so low,
you probably should have cut in June or
or or July. And so, you're not saying,
"Oh my god, the world's coming to an
end. Everything's falling apart." But
you're saying, "Yeah, well, we kind of
missed it. The data weren't there at the
time." In retrospect, had we had those
data, we probably would have cut in June
or July. So, we're just doing catchup
now. Now for us the real issue is how do
you interpret like a 100,000 because we
would say okay 100,000 less our bias of
70,000 means real job creation of 30,000
so you should be talking about 50. I
don't think we've convinced the market
yet that that's the way you should look
at it. By the way, just before going on,
so on the eco page, consensus is 75K.
Consensus is for the unemployment rate
to tick up to 4.3%.
Also, average our earning earnings of.3%
month-over-month growth. So, that's sort
of like what we're looking at this week.
We've had some sort of soft data. We had
initial claims today come in at 237K.
That was ahead of the estimate of 230K.
ADP employment, take it or leave it, 54K
versus estimates of 68K, down
significantly from the 106K revised last
month. ISM services employment 46.5.
That was a little bit shy of
expectations. So soft and there's this
risk of softening. I just think it's
really interesting the range of
possibilities for September because, you
know, we were just in Jackson Hole and
you're talking about, oh, maybe there's
a case for 50, but there's also still a
lot of residual concern about inflation
and the inflation dragon has yet to
fully be slayed.
>> The reason I would focus on the labor
market is because if it's as weak as we
think it is and incorrectly measured,
the slack in the labor market will take
care of inflation.
>> Okay? that the again I I'm sort of more
on Waller's side that you're not going
to have any kind of power on the labor
side. If I can make one comment, I mean
some people get their pleasure from
banging their head against the wall. The
wall I bang my head against once or
twice a year is taking all of these
incoming data on labor market indicators
and trying to predict non-farm payrolls.
>> You got to have a hobby.
>> You you got to have a hobby. And this
one might be the definition of insanity.
And none none of them work a bucket of
spit. I'm looking at the um band-aid on
your forehead. See, this is when you
talk about banging your head against the
wall for pleasure. You're actually
talking literally it would appear.
>> Well, you should see the wall.
>> Okay. We would be remiss if when we have
you in the studio if we did not ask
about what's going on with bonds. So,
one of the things that's happening today
is because of that softening jobs data
that Joe just laid out, we are seeing a
little bit of a recovery in bonds
because there's more expectation that
the Fed might cut. But the big story in
recent days has been this huge selloff
in bonds particularly at the long end.
And it does
>> particularly in Europe,
>> particularly in Europe, but also in the
US. It does seem kind of weird that
we're talking about the economy slowing
and meanwhile the long end of the curve
just keeps going up. What's going on?
>> Markets attention span is maybe not as
long as you give it credit for. And I I
think the problem is this that you look
at fiscal situations that are
deteriorating globally and likely to
deteriorate in the US especially if
anything happens with the tariffs to
pull them back.
>> Oh yeah. And markets are kind of saying,
look, in the long term, this doesn't
look good. It looks like there's a lot
of borrowing out there. But the long
term in market terms can be six weeks
and it could be six years. You don't
know when those forces are going to
matter. So absent anything else, the
market pays attention to it. Then you
you sort of come in this week and every
number seems to be soft. You say, "Oh my
god, the Fed's going to cut." and all of
a sudden this sort of selling of bonds
especially because the market probably
got reasonably short worrying itself
about the fiscal situation they say oh
my god may maybe not so short and people
are buying back the bonds that they've
sold and you get the kind of dramatic
movement we've seen this week we've
argued in the short term both FX and
bonds are going to be driven by the Fed
and the US economy and by short term I
mean the next month or six weeks
>> I think once you get past that we're we
don't think inflation's going to
disappear
And even outside of the tariff induced
inflation, the non-tariff goods and
services seem to be at best stay steady
and even maybe even edging up a bit.
There's a bit of fiscal stimulus in in
in Trump's fiscal package. I think it's
possible that the the economy is not as
bad as it might look based on the
employment numbers that we're getting
especially if there is a productivity
pickup in the data that's not really
recognized. So we see a possibility or
we actually see more than a possibility.
We expect dollar weakness in the next
couple of weeks but by the time we get
to the end of the year we could see the
dollar strengthening positioning is kind
of short dollars in our view and same
with the bond market. You know, while
the market's sort of saying, "Oh my god,
last week was debating 0 and 25. This
week I suspect they'll be debating 25
and 50." While the market's debating
that bond yields are going to come down,
once that's kind of settled in terms of
market expectations, I think they'll
look at the fiscal picture and kind of
say, you know, low fours, maybe not.
>> It's interesting. It occurs to me when
you say how when we talk about how bad
the economy is that there's actually two
different ways of what bad could mean.
So one is bad could just mean a sort of
where you are on the cycle. We're in a
deceleration cycle. We're not creating
as many jobs. Therefore, we have to have
a lower rate of interest to get things
going again. But then bad could also
mean more sort of qualitatively where
what's really bad is slackening growth
and also a firm inflation picture such
that traditional measures of policy
stimulus or dstimulus don't work as well
they'd like because there is some sort
of deeper rot. And it sounds like what
you're saying, if I can put all this
together, is that cyclally there's a
slowdown. There may be a case for 50
basis point cut very soon, case for
lower rates, but not so bad in the case
of the US economy is broken and
therefore policy measures won't work to
get it revived again.
>> Yeah, I think that's right. We actually
don't think they'll do much more than
50. They'll say, "Okay, we've caught up.
Time to wait and see." I and our
baseline because we're not yet sure
about what the employment number is is
is 25 and stop but you know we've been
talking about the choice being between
25 and 50.
>> Just adding on one more it really is
just on the Europe situation we mostly
talk about the US like France has also
their 10-year yield has been shooting
higher.
>> Yeah. This is the crazy thing. I think
if we didn't have everything that was
going on in the US at the moment like
the France story would be huge in the
market.
>> Yeah. So give us your talk to us about
Europe for a minute.
>> Yeah, look, there's a France story. I'm
actually scheduled to go to France, but
it looks like they might be on strike
next week, so I'm not sure how how
that's going to play out. The structural
problems that they face are are kind of
enormous. I mean, the French deficit's
about as large as the US deficit, and
their interest rates are way lower than
US interest rates. They have a very
fragile government. They're trying to do
some sort of fiscal consolidation
because it's like it's not just a
minority. It's like a tiny government.
>> The opposition parties are kind of
saying no way. And so that that's
setting the US aside. The the French and
broadly speaking, the European situation
isn't that good. And in some cases,
you're seeing sterling trade like a
emerging markets economy that in in that
the correlation of interest rates in the
currency is not the normal G10 one where
higher rates lead to a stronger currency
because people look at the return. the
higher rates are viewed as risk premium
and they're associated with a weaker
currency.
>> I mean know yeah you can look at levels
sorry just to keep going you can look at
levels of debt to GDP or ratios etc. But
it sounds like the common thread here at
least to me and this is the bias or this
is my lens when you talk about what's
going on in France maybe you won't even
be able to visit there because of strike
when you talk about we had Liz Truss on
the podcast recently politically these
are not well functioning polities right
now are they? Yes. And I'd say that the
ability particularly to get through
unpopular measures like fiscal
consolidation is very limited.
>> And that's why they're all sort of have
their backs against the wall and the
markets are looking at this and kind of
saying you don't really have a source of
growth and you have to do austerity but
you're not. So we're looking at these
ratios and where they're going to go. I
think the one advantage the US has is
that here you know at least you can ask
tell the story where you say look some
of the productivity numbers look pretty
good on the ground you sense that AI is
making inroads you we don't know when
it's going to matter in terms of actual
realized productivity but it could you
can tell a story that's that's somewhat
optimistic whereas if you look at Europe
they kind of have they have high energy
costs their capital markets aren't as
well developed for financing these kind
of in innovative firms and they're kind
of lagging on the technology side. So
the battle seems to be between the US
and China and other countries sort of
really lagging which doesn't mean the US
outcome is going to be great but at
least you can tell the story whereas
it's much harder to tell the story a
European story of say private sector
induced growth.
>> What's that line again Joe? It's like
the US innovates China iterates and
Europe writes the regulation.
>> Do you remember that? Yeah. And they
also get tons of vacation and they have
this amazing life and so
>> and put out think pieces.
>> Yeah. But which sounds great. So many
people would kill for a job writing
pieces.
>> I lived in France for a number of years
and I'd say the quality of life of the
median French worker is well above that
of the median US worker.
>> That's what I'm saying. We need to have
some um this is an important point. You
observe that.
>> Yeah.
>> And the question is whether it's
sustainable. It's like living on your
credit card, but
>> we need to regulate more. We need to
instead of innovating, let's try
regulating.
>> We should go We should go drink some
wine for lunch.
>> Yeah, sounds great.
>> Great suggestion.
>> Lots more is produced by Carmen
Rodriguez and Dashel Bennett with help
from Moses Andam and Kale Brooks.
>> Our sound engineer is Blake Maples. Sage
Bowman is the head of Bloomberg
podcasts. Please rate, review, and
subscribe to OddLotss and lots more on
your favorite podcast platforms.
>> And remember that Bloomberg subscribers
can listen to all our podcasts ad free
by connecting through Apple Podcasts.
Thanks for listening.